## Working With More Futures

When we switched from using two futures to three in the previous section, we
also had to switch from using `join` to using `join3`. It would be annoying to
do this every time we changed our code. Happily, we have a macro form of `join`
to which we can pass an arbitrary number of arguments. It also handles awaiting
the futures itself. Thus, we could rewrite the code from Listing 17-16 to use
`join!` instead of `join3`, as in Listing 17-17:

<Listing number="17-17" caption="Using `join!` to wait for multiple futures" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-17/src/main.rs:here}}
```

</Listing>

This is definitely a nice improvement over needing to swap between `join` and
`join3` and `join4` and so on! However, both the function nor macro forms of
`join` only work for cases where we know the number of futures ahead of time. If
instead we have a dynamic number of futures, we need a function which works with
a collection type which can grow and shrink dynamically at runtime, such as a
vector. In real-world Rust, pushing futures into a collection and then waiting
on some or all the futures in that collection to complete is a very common
pattern.

The `trpl::join_all` function accepts any type which implements the `Iterator`
trait, which we learned about back in Chapter 13, so it seems like just the
ticket. Let’s try putting our futures in a vector, and replace `join3` with
`join_all`.

<Listing  number="17-18" caption="Storing anonymous futures in a vector and calling `join_all`">

```rust,ignore,does_not_compile
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-18/src/main.rs:here}}
```

</Listing>

Unfortunately, this does not compile. Instead, we get this error:

```text
{{#include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-18/output.txt}}
```

This error message is admittedly not the most helpful! It only tells us that it
expected one async block and found another—but why is it looking for the async
blocks that it names here, and why does it only reference them by where they
appear in the code?

One clue is the format of this message. Notice that it is exactly the same as if
we had tried to create a `Vec` with a a number and a string in it:

<Listing number="17-19" caption="Trying to construct a `Vec` with a number and a string" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust,ignore,does_not_compile
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-19/src/main.rs:here}}
```

</Listing>

The output there would be:

```text
{{#include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-19/output.txt}}
```

Saying “expected *something*, found *something else*” is Rust’s standard format
for telling us about a type mismatch. As we saw with vectors in [“Using an Enum
to Store Multiple Types”][collections] back in Chapter 8, we need the type of
each item in a collection to be the same—and `tx1_fut`, `rx_fut`, and `tx_fut`
do not have the same type.

The underlying issue here is what we learned in the previous section: async
blocks compile to anonymous futures. Under the hood, there is a data structure
corresponding to each of these blocks, and it has its own unique type. This
might be surprising. After all, none of them returns anything, so the `Future`
type in each case is `Future<Output = ()>`. However, `Future` is a trait, not a
concrete type. The actual types here are invisible from our point of view as the
person writing the code.

In Chapter 8, we discussed one way to include multiple types in a single vector:
using an enum to represent each of the different types which can appear in the
vector. We cannot do that here, though. For one thing, we do not even have a way
to name the different types, because they are anonymous. For another, the reason
we reached for a vector and `join_all` in the first place was to be able to work
with a dynamic collection of futures where we do not know what they will all be
until runtime.

To make this work, we need to use *trait objects*, just as we did for returning
different kinds of errors from the same function in [“Returning Errors from the
run function”][dyn] back in Chapter 12. Again, we will cover trait objects in
detail in Chapter 17. Here, it lets us treat each of the anonymous futures
produced by these types as interchangeable, since all of them by definition
implement the `Future` trait.

We can start by wrapping each of the futures in the `vec!` in a `Box::new()`.
Unfortunately, the initial way we might try this, as shown in Listing 17-20,
still does not compile.

<Listing number="17-20" caption="Trying to use `Box::new` to align the types of the futures in a `Vec`" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust,ignore,does_not_compile
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-20/src/main.rs:here}}
```

</Listing>

In fact, we have the same basic error we did before, but we get one for both the
second and third `Box::new` calls, and we also get new errors referring to the
`Unpin` trait.

We can start by fixing the type error around the `Box::new` calls, by telling
the compiler explicitly that we want to use these types as trait objects. The
clearest way to do that here is by adding a type annotation to the declaration
of `futures`, as we see in Listing 17-21. The type we have to write here is a
little involved, so let’s walk through each part of it.

- The innermost type is the future itself. We note explicitly that it the output
  of the future is the unit type `()` by writing `Future<Output = ()>`.
- Then we annotate the trait with `dyn` to mark it as dynamic.
- The entire trait is wrapped in a `Box`.
- Finally, we state explicitly that `futures` is a `Vec` containing these items.

<Listing number="17-21" caption="Fixing the rest of the type mismatch errors by using an explicit type declaration" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust,ignore,does_not_compile
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-21/src/main.rs:here}}
```

</Listing>

That already made a big difference. Now when we run the compiler, we only have
the errors mentioning `Unpin`. Although there are three of them, notice that
each is very similar in its contents.

```console
{{#include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-21/output.txt}}
```

That is a *lot* to digest, so let’s pull it apart. The first part of the message
tell us that the first async block (`src/main.rs:8:23: 20:10`) does not
implement the `Unpin` trait, and suggests using `pin!` or `Box::pin` to resolve
it. The rest of the message tells us *why* that is required: the `JoinAll`
struct, which is itself a `Future`, is also generic over a `Future`, and
`Future` itself requires the `Unpin` trait. Understanding this error means we
need to dive into a little more of how the `Future` type actually works, in
particular the idea of *pinning*.

### Pinning and the Pin and Unpin Traits

When we introduced the `Future` trait in the previous chapter, we saw that the
definition of its `poll` method has an unusual way of specifying the `self`
parameter. To review, here is the full definition of `Future`:

```rust
pub trait Future {
    type Output;

    // Required method
    fn poll(self: Pin<&mut Self>, cx: &mut Context<'_>) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
}
```

We have not seen a method definition like this before, where `self` has a type
annotation rather than simply being named like `self`, `mut self`, `&self`, or
`&mut self`. This syntax means that the method can only be called when the
instance of the type which implements `Future` is behind a `Pin` pointer type.
This syntax is not specific to `Pin`; it also works with `Box` and other smart
pointer types, and we will see it again in Chapter 18.

Here, the signature tells us that if we want to poll a future to check whether
it is `Pending` or `Ready(Output)`, the type which implements `Future` has to be
behind a `Pin` smart pointer type. Recalling that `.await` is implemented in
terms of calls to `poll()`, this starts to explain the error message we saw
above—but that was in terms of `Unpin`, not `Pin`. So what exactly are `Pin` and
`Unpin`, how do they relate, and why does `Future` need `self` to be in a `Pin`
type to call `poll`?

In [“Futures and Syntax: What Are Futures”][what-are-futures], we described how
a series of await points in a future get compiled into a state machine—and noted
how the compiler helps make sure that state machine follows all of Rust’s normal
rules around safety, including borrowing and ownership. Consider code which has
a mutable `Vec` of strings, which asynchronously reads strings from files and
pushes those strings into the `Vec`:

<Listing number="17-22" caption="Borrowing mutable data across multiple `.await` points">

```rust
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-22/src/main.rs:here}}
```

</Listing>

If we think about the state machine that would get compiled to, it might be
something kind of like this:

```rust,ignore
enum AsyncStateMachine<'a> {
    AfterFirstAwait(&'a mut Vec<String>),
    AfterSecondAwait(&'a mut Vec<String>),
}
```

That is, at each `.await` in the source code, Rust would look at what state is
needed between that await point and the point another `.await` appears or the
async block ends, and create a corresponding variant in the `AsyncStateMachine`.
Each variant has the appropriate kind of reference to the data that will be
referenced in that section. The real implementation is not *exactly* like this,
but it is close enough to give the right mental model.

And this could actually be fine, on its own—Rust would keep track of those
mutable references, and if we got something wrong, the borrow checker would tell
us. It gets a bit tricky, though, if we want to move around the future that
corresponds to that block. Remember, we could always do something like this:

```rust,ignore
let file_reads_future = async {
    // snip...
};

let some_other_future = async {
    // snip...
};

trpl::join(file_reads_future, some_other_future).await;
```

<!--
    TODO: this paragraph is close to right, but it needs to be revised a bit to
    make sure it is accurate about *what* is not moved.
-->

If we pass those futures into `join`, or return them from a function, or put
them in a data structure to keep track of for some reason, that moves the state
machine as well. That means the reference to `Vec<String>` for the values we
read in with `trpl::read_to_string` moves along with it. Since references point
to the actual memory address of the `Vec`, Rust needs some way to either update
them so they are still valid after the `Vec` moves, or it needs some way to keep
`Vec` from getting moved around so that the references do not need to be
updated. Updating all the references to an object every time it moves could be
quite a lot of work for the compiler to add, especially since there can be a
whole web of references that need updating. On the other hand, making sure the
underlying item *does not move in memory* can be “free” at runtime in exchange
for keeping some promises at compile time. That is where `Pin` and `Unpin` come
in.

> Note: The specific mechanics for how `Pin` and `Unpin` work under the hood are
> covered extensively in the API documentation for `std::pin`, so if you would
> like to understand them more fundamentally, that is a great place to start.
> Those details are not at all necessary for working with async Rust day to day,
> though. Here, we will stick to the parts you *do* need to understand to work
> with them in everyday Rust!

`Pin` is a smart pointer, much like `Box`, `Rc`, and the others we saw in
Chapter 15. Unlike those, however, `Pin` only works with *other pointer types*
like reference (`&` and `&mut`) and smart pointers (`Box`, `Rc`, and so on). To
be precise, `Pin` works with types which implement the `Deref` or `DerefMut`
traits, which we covered in Chapter 15. You can think of this restriction as
equivalent to only working with pointers, though, since implementing `Deref` or
`DerefMut` means your type behaves like a pointer type. including references,
other smart pointers, and so on.

Wrapping a pointer type in `Pin` enforces the exact guarantee we need: the value
*behind* the pointer we wrap in `Pin` cannot move. It is “pinned” in its current
spot by the `Pin` wrapper. Thus, if you have `Pin<Box<SomeType>>`, you actually
pin the `SomeType` value, *not* the `Box` pointer. In fact, the pinned box
pointer can move around freely. Remember: we care about making sure the data
ultimately being referenced stays in its place. If a pointer moves around, but
the data it points to is in the same place, there is no problem.

However, most types are perfectly safe to move around, even if they happen to be
behind a `Pin` pointer. Remember: the problem `Pin` addresses is when data
structures have internal references which need to maintained when the structure
moves around, as happens with internal references in futures. Primitive values
like numbers and booleans do not have any internal structure like that, so they
are obviously safe. Neither do most types you normally work with in Rust. A
`Vec`, for example, does not have any internal references it needs to keep up to
date this way, so you can move it around without worrying. But what happens if
you have a `Pin<u32>` or a `Pin<Vec<String>>`?

We need a way to tell the compiler that it is actually just fine to move items
around in cases like these where there is nothing to worry about. For that, we
have `Unpin`. `Unpin` is a marker trait, like `Send` and `Sync`, which we saw in
Chapter 16. Recall that marker traits have no functionality of their own. They
exist only to tell the compiler that it is safe to use the type which implements
a given trait in a particular context. `Unpin` informs the compiler that a given
type does *not* need to uphold any particular guarantees about whether the value
in question can be moved.

Just like `Send` and `Sync`, the compiler implements `Unpin` automatically for
most types, and implementing it manually is unsafe. That is because you have to
make sure that the type for which you are implementing `Unsafe` *never* moves
data out from a reference that *needs* to be stable.

> Note: This combination of `Pin` and `Unpin` allows a whole class of complex
> types to be safe in Rust which are otherwise difficult to implement because
> they are *self-referential*. That is, they are data structures where one part
> of the structure refers to another internally. As we have seen, futures can
> match that description, so self-referential types which require `Pin` show up
> *most* commonly in async Rust today, but you might—very rarely!—see it in
> other contexts, too.

Now we know enough to understand the error message from above. The problem is
that the futures produced by an async block are *not* pinned by default.
Strictly: they implement `!Unpin` to opt out of being copyable by default the
way most types are. We need to pin them explicitly.

Now that we have an idea what that error message was telling us, we can finally
get our `join_all` call to compile! First, we need to explicitly annotate
`futures` as referring to a pinned `Box` of futures. Second, we actually need to
pin the futures, which we can do using the handy `Box::pin` API, which exists
for exactly this. Putting that together, we end up with the code in Listing
17-23.

<Listing number="17-23" caption="Using `Pin` and `Box::pin` to make the `Vec` type check" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-23/src/main.rs:here}}
```

</Listing>

If we compile and run this, we finally get the output we hoped for:

<!-- Not extracting output because changes to this output aren't significant;
the changes are likely to be due to the threads running differently rather than
changes in the compiler -->

```text
received 'hi'
received 'more'
received 'from'
received 'messages'
received 'the'
received 'for'
received 'future'
received 'you'
```

Phew!

There is a bit more we can explore here. For one thing, using `Pin<Box<T>>`
comes with a small amount of extra overhead from putting these futures on the
heap with `Box`—and we are only doing that to get the types to line up. We don’t
actually *need* the heap allocation, after all: these futures are local to this
particular function. As noted above, `Pin` is itself a smart pointer, so we can
get the benefit of having a single type in the `Vec`—the original reason we
reached for `Box`—without doing a heap allocation. We can use `Pin` directly
instead.

The `std::pin::pin` macro exists to do just that for values. However, we must
still be explicit about the type of the pinned reference; otherwise Rust will
still not know to interpret these as dynamic trait objects, which is what we
need them to be in the `Vec`. We therefore `pin!` each future when we define it,
and define `futures` as a `Vec` containing pinned mutable references to the
dynamic `Future` type, as in Listing 17-24.

<Listing number="17-24" caption="Using `Pin` directly with the `pin!` macro to avoid unnecessary heap allocations" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-24/src/main.rs:here}}
```

</Listing>

This keeps everything on the stack, which is a nice little performance win, but
it is still a lot of explicit types, which is quite unusual for Rust!

There is another, more serious, issue as well. We got this far by ignoring the
fact that we might have different `Output` types. For example, in Listing 17-25,
the anonymous future type for `a` implements `Future<Output = u32>`, the
anonymous future type for `b` implements `Future<Output = &str>`, and the
anonymous future type for `c` implements `Future<Output = bool>`. We can use
`trpl::join!` to await them together, since it accepts futures of different
types.

<Listing number="17-25" caption="Three futures with distinct types" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-25/src/main.rs:here}}
```

</Listing>

We cannot use `trpl::join_all` with these futures, though, because
we will never be able to make them have the same type. (Remember, that error is
what got us started on this adventure with `Pin`!)

We have a basic tradeoff here: we can either deal with a dynamic number of
futures with `join_all`, as long as they all have the same type, or we can deal
with a set number of futures with the `join` functions or the `join!` macro,
even if they have different types. This is the same as working with any other
type in Rust, though: futures are not special, even though we have some nice
syntax for working with them, and that is a good thing!

In practice, you will usually work directly with `async` and `.await`, and only
as a secondary tool reach for the functions like `join` or `join_all`, or their
corresponding macro equivalents. Likewise, you will only need to reach for `pin`
now and again to use them *with* those APIs. These kinds of tools are mostly
handy for building frameworks, or especially when you are building a runtime
itself, rather than for day to day Rust code. When you see them, though, now you
will know what to do!

[collections]: ch08-01-vectors.html#using-an-enum-to-store-multiple-types
[dyn]: ch12-03-improving-error-handling-and-modularity.html
[what-are-futures]: ch17-01-futures-and-syntax.html#what-are-futures
